<!DOCTYPE html> 
<html lang='pt' xmlns:epub='http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops' xmlns='http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml'> 
<head><title>Bibliografia</title> 
<meta charset='UTF-8' /> 
<meta content='TeX4ht (http://www.cse.ohio-state.edu/~gurari/TeX4ht/)' name='generator' /> 
<link href='livro.css' rel='stylesheet' type='text/css' /> 
</head><body>
       <!-- l. 3 --><div class='crosslinks'><p class='noindent'></p></div>
       <h2 class='likechapterHead' id='bibliografia'><a id='x33-1970003'></a>Bibliografia</h2>
<p id='bibliografia1'><a id='Q1-33-336'></a></p>
<div class='thebibliography'>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.birnbaum1968some'></a>   <a id='Xbirnbaum1968some'></a> BIRNBAUM, A.L. Some latent trait models and their use in inferring an examinee’s ability.
<span class='cmbx-12'>Statistical theories of mental test scores</span>, Addison-Wesley, 1968.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2018:Calsavara.Serra.ea'></a>   <a id='X2018:Calsavara.Serra.ea'></a> CALSAVARA, Alcides; SERRA, Ana Paula Gonçalves; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis;
CARVALHO, Leandro Silva Galvão de; JONATHAN, Miguel; CORREIA, Ronaldo Celso Messias.
Método baseado nos referenciais de formação da sbc para reestruturação de descritivos de
disciplinas de ciência da computação em conformidade com as DCN de 2016. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Workshop
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>sobre Educação em Computação</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2018. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.5753/wei.2018.3517'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2014:China.Zampirolli'></a>    <a id='X2014:China.Zampirolli'></a> CHINA, Rodrigo Teiske; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis. Correção automática
de testes de múltipla escolha utilizando processamento de imagem e vídeo no android. In:
<span class='cmbx-12'>SICUFABC</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2014. <a href='https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369299655_Correcao_Automatica_de_Testes_de_Multipla_Escolha_Utilizando_Processamento_de_Imagem_e_Video_no_Android'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>url<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2016:China.Zampirolli.ea'></a>    <a id='X2016:China.Zampirolli.ea'></a> CHINA, Rodrigo Teiske; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; NEVES, Rogério;
QUILICI-GONZALEZ, José Artur. An application for automatic multiple-choice test grading on
android. <span class='cmbx-12'>REVISTA BRASILEIRA DE INICIAÇÃO CIENTÍFICA</span>, v. 3, p. 1–22, 2016.
ISSN 2359232X.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2018:Correia.Calsavara.ea'></a>   <a id='X2018:Correia.Calsavara.ea'></a> CORREIA, Ronaldo Celso Messias; CALSAVARA, Alcides; SERRA, Ana Paula Gonçalves;
ZAMPIROLLI, F. A.; JONATHAN, Miguel. Ciência da computação: A história e as
características dos cursos de ciência da computação no brasil. p. 12–16, 2018. <a href='http://www.sbc.org.br/images/flippingbook/computacaobrasil/computa_38/pdf/CompBrasil_38_180.pdf'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>url<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.hintze1998violin'></a>    <a id='Xhintze1998violin'></a> HINTZE, J.L.; NELSON, R.D. Violin plots: a box plot-density trace synergism. <span class='cmbx-12'>The
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>American Statistician</span>, Taylor &amp; Francis, v. 52, n. 2, p. 181–184, 1998.
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.hogan2023cs0'></a>   <a id='Xhogan2023cs0'></a> HOGAN, Emma; LI, Ruoxuan; RAJ, Adalbert Gerald Soosai. CS0 vs. CS1: Understanding
fears and confidence amongst non-majors in introductory CS courses. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Proceedings of the
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2023.
p. 25–31.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2023:Josko.Zampirolli'></a>   <a id='X2023:Josko.Zampirolli'></a> JOSKO, João Marcelo; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis. Introducing programming logic
consistently through gamification. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Simpósio Brasileiro de Informática na Educação</span>.
[S.l.: s.n.], 2023.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.jw1977exploratory'></a>   <a id='Xjw1977exploratory'></a> JW, T. Exploratory data analysis. <span class='cmbx-12'>Reading: Addison-Wesley</span>, 1977.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2016:Kobayashi.Zampirolli.ea'></a>    <a id='X2016:Kobayashi.Zampirolli.ea'></a> KOBAYASHI, Guiou; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; QUILICI-GONZALEZ,
José Artur. Report of a distance learning course of specialization in information technology in
a brazilian public university. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2016.
<a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2016.7757651'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.lamport1985latex'></a>   <a id='Xlamport1985latex'></a> LAMPORT, Leslie. Latex–a document preparation system addison–wesley. <span class='cmbx-12'>Reading, MA</span>,
1985.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2017:Neves.Zampirolli'></a>   <a id='X2017:Neves.Zampirolli'></a> NEVES, Rogério; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis. <span class='cmbx-12'>Processando a informação: um
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>livro prático de programação independente de linguagem</span>. São Bernardo do Campo:
EdUFABC, 2017. ISBN 9788568576717.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.rodriguez2012virtual'></a>    <a id='Xrodriguez2012virtual'></a> PINO, Juan Carlos Rodríguez-del; ROYO, Enrique Rubio; FIGUEROA, Zenón
Hernández. A virtual programming lab for moodle with automatic assessment and anti-plagiarism
features. 2012.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2019:Souza.Zampirolli.ea'></a>   <a id='X2019:Souza.Zampirolli.ea'></a> SOUZA, Fábio Rezande de; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; KOBAYASHI, Guiou.
Convolutional neural network applied to code assignment grading. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>International Conference
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>on Computer Supported Education</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2019. ISBN 9789897583674. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.5220/0007711000620069'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Teubl.Batista.ea'></a>    <a id='X2021:Teubl.Batista.ea'></a> TEUBL, Fernando; BATISTA, Valério Ramos; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis.
Maketests: Generate and correct individualized questions with many styles. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>International
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Conference on Computer Supported Education</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2021. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.5220/0010337902450253'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2022:Teubl.Batista.ea'></a>    <a id='X2022:Teubl.Batista.ea'></a> TEUBL, Fernando; BATISTA, Valério Ramos; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis.
Maketests: A flexible generator and corrector for hardcopy exams. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Computer Supported
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Education</span>. 1. ed. [S.l.: s.n.], 2022. p. 293–315. ISBN 9783031147562. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-14756-2_15'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2023:Teubl.Zampirolli'></a>   <a id='X2023:Teubl.Zampirolli'></a> TEUBL, Fernando; ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis. Automated correction for trace tables
in a CS1 course. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Simpósio Brasileiro de Informática na Educação</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2023.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2020:Zampirolli.Batista.ea'></a>    <a id='X2020:Zampirolli.Batista.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; BATISTA, Valério Ramos; IRIARTE, Edson
Alex Arrázola; JUNIOR, Irineu Antunes. Online assessments with parametric questions and
automatic corrections: an improvement for MCTest using google forms and sheets. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Simpósio
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Brasileiro de Informática na Educação</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2020. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.5753/cbie.sbie.2020.51'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Zampirolli.Batista.ea'></a>   <a id='X2021:Zampirolli.Batista.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; BATISTA, Valério Ramos; JOSKO, João Marcelo;
STEIL, Leonardo José; TREVISAN, Sandra Cristina. Experiments in selection processes
of students for a crammer. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Latin American Conference on Learning Objects and
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Technologies</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2021. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LACLO54177.2021.00076'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Zampirolli.Batista.ea*1'></a>  <a id='X2021:Zampirolli.Batista.ea*1'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; BATISTA, Valério Ramos; PIMENTEL, Edson Pinheiro;
BRAGA, Juliana. Facilitating the generation of parametric questions and their export to moodle.
In: <span class='cmbx-12'>IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2021. <a href='https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9637055'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>url<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2016:Zampirolli.Batista.ea'></a>   <a id='X2016:Zampirolli.Batista.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; BATISTA, Valério Ramos; QUILICI-GONZALEZ,
José Artur. An automatic generator and corrector of multiple choice tests with random answer
keys. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2016. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FIE.2016.7757467'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Zampirolli.Batista.ea*2'></a>   <a id='X2021:Zampirolli.Batista.ea*2'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; BATISTA, Valério Ramos; RODRIGUEZ, Carla Lopes;
ROCHA, Rafaela Vilela da; GOYA, Denise. Automated assessment with multiple-choice questions
using weighted answers. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>13th International Conference on Computer Supported
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Education</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2021. <a href='https://www.scitepress.org/Link.aspx?doi=10.5220/0010338002540261'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>url<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2015:Zampirolli.China.ea'></a>    <a id='X2015:Zampirolli.China.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; CHINA, Rodrigo Teiske; NEVES, Rogério;
QUILICI-GONZALEZ, José Artur. Automatic correction of multiple-choice tests on android
devices. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Workshop de Visão Computacional</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2015. <a href='https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360223017_Automatic_Correction_of_Multiple-Choice_Tests_on_Android_Devices'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>url<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2018:Zampirolli.Goya.ea'></a>    <a id='X2018:Zampirolli.Goya.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; GOYA, Denise; PIMENTEL, Edson Pinheiro;
KOBAYASHI, Guiou. Evaluation process for an introductory programming course using blended
learning in engineering education. <span class='cmbx-12'>COMPUTER APPLICATIONS IN ENGINEERING
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>EDUCATION</span>, v. 2018, p. 1–13, 2018. ISSN 10613773.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Zampirolli.Josko.ea'></a>    <a id='X2021:Zampirolli.Josko.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; JOSKO, João Marcelo; VENERO, Mirtha
Lina Fernandéz; KOBAYASHI, Guiou; SILVA, Francisco José Fraga da; GOYA, Denise;
SAVEGNAGO, Heitor Rodrigues. An experience of automated assessment in a large-scale
introduction programming course. <span class='cmbx-12'>COMPUTER APPLICATIONS IN ENGINEERING
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>EDUCATION</span>, p. 1284–1299, 2021. ISSN 10613773.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Zampirolli.Junior.ea'></a>   <a id='X2021:Zampirolli.Junior.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; JUNIOR, Irineu Antunes; STEIL, Leonardo José; JR.,
Leandro Teodoro. Interactive ENEM: exams with statistics and free access. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Latin American
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Conference on Learning Objects and Technologies</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2021. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LACLO54177.2021.00078'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2020:Zampirolli.Pisani.ea'></a>    <a id='X2020:Zampirolli.Pisani.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; PISANI, Paulo Henrique; JOSKO, João Marcelo;
KOBAYASHI, Guiou; SILVA, Francisco José Fraga da; GOYA, Denise; SAVEGNAGO,
Heitor Rodrigues. Parameterized and automated assessment on an introductory programming
course. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Simpósio Brasileiro de Informática na Educação</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2020. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.5753/cbie.sbie.2020.1573'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2013:Zampirolli.Quilici-Gonzalez.ea'></a>   <a id='X2013:Zampirolli.Quilici-Gonzalez.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; QUILICI-GONZALEZ, José Artur; NEVES, Rogério.
Automatic correction of multiple-choice tests using digital cameras and image processing. In:
<span class='cmbx-12'>Workshop de Visão Computacional</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2013. <a href='https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360222832_Automatic_Correction_of_Multiple-Choice_Tests_using_Digital_Cameras_and_Image_Processing'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>url<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Zampirolli.Sato.ea'></a>   <a id='X2021:Zampirolli.Sato.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; SATO, Cristiane M.; SAVEGNAGO, Heitor Rodrigues;
BATISTA, Valério Ramos; KOBAYASHI, Guiou. Automated assessment of parametric
programming in a large-scale course. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Latin American Conference on Learning Objects
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>and Technologies</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2021. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LACLO54177.2021.00079'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2019:Teubl.Batista.ea'></a>    <a id='X2019:Teubl.Batista.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; TEUBL, Fernando; BATISTA, Valério Ramos. A
generator and corrector of parametric questions in hard copy. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>International Conference on
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Information Technology : New Generations</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2019. <a href='https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-14070-0_37'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>url<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2019:Zampirolli.Teubl.ea'></a>   <a id='X2019:Zampirolli.Teubl.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; TEUBL, Fernando; BATISTA, Valério Ramos. Online
generator and corrector of parametric questions in hard copy useful for the elaboration of thousands
of individualized exams. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>International Conference on Computer Supported Education</span>.
[S.l.]: SCITEPRESS - Science and Technology Publications, Lda, 2019. ISBN 9789897583674.
<a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.5220/0007672603520359'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
<p class='bibitem'><span class='biblabel'>
<span class='bibsp'>   </span></span><a id='cite.2021:Zampirolli.Teubl.ea'></a>    <a id='X2021:Zampirolli.Teubl.ea'></a> ZAMPIROLLI, Francisco de Assis; TEUBL, Fernando; KOBAYASHI, Guiou; NEVES,
Rogério; ROZANTE, Luiz; BATISTA, Valério Ramos. Introductory computer science course
by adopting many programming languages. In: <span class='cmbx-12'>Simpósio Brasileiro de Informática na
</span><span class='cmbx-12'>Educação</span>. [S.l.: s.n.], 2021. <a href='http://dx.doi.org/10.5753/sbie.2021.217464'><span class='cmmi-12'>&lt;</span>doi<span class='cmmi-12'>&gt;</span></a>.
</p>
</div>
<p class='noindent'>
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
</p> 
<p class='indent'>        <br class='newline' /> 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
</p> 
<p class='indent'>        <br class='newline' /> 
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
</p> 
<p class='indent'>
                                                                                                  
                                                                                                  
       </p> 
                                                           
<!-- l. 25 --><div class='crosslinks'><p class='noindent'></p></div>
        
</body> 
</html>